Page 1

http://artnodes.uoc.edu
Article
Black Holes and Objectivity
Date of submission: October 2019 Accepted in: December 2019 Published in: January 2020
Abstract
The first ever direct image of a black hole, released in April 2019, was a paradigm shift not  just in scientific imaging, but also in the cultural appreciation of the unknown. Its realisation  demanded a global technological collaboration on hitherto unseen scales and also the appli- cation of new and rigorous forms of objectivity. This text discusses how complex and esoteric  planet-wide scientific apparatus and observations at the cutting edge of fundamental science  demand a heightened awareness of objectivity and the implementation of transdisciplinarity. 
Keywords
Black hole, objectivity, observation, physics, Galison, networks
Recommended citation
Gracie, Andy; Bello, Mónica. 2020. «Black Holes and Objectivity». Artnodes, Nº.25: pp. 1-8.  UOC. [Consulta: dd/mm/yy]. http://doi.org/10.7238/a.v0i25.3332
The texts published in this journal are – unless otherwise indicated – covered by the Creative  Commons Spain Attribution 4.0 International license. The full text of the license can be consulted here:  http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
Andy Gracie  Hostprods
Mónica Bello CERN
http://artnodes.uoc.edu
NODO «DIALOGS BETWEEN ART AND FUNDAMENTAL SCIENCE»Page 2

Agujeros negros y objetividad
Resumen
La primera imagen directa de un agujero negro, tomada en abril de 2019, representa un cambio de paradigma no  solo en lo que respecta a las imágenes científicas, sino también en la apreciación cultural de lo desconocido. Para  lograr este hito fue necesario contar con una colaboración tecnológica global a una escala nunca vista, así como  la aplicación de nuevas y rigurosas formas de objetividad. Este texto quiere reflexionar sobre la necesidad de que  los complejos y esotéricos aparatos y las observaciones científicas de la ciencia fundamental más recientes vayan  acompañados de una mayor conciencia de la objetividad y de la implementación de la transdisciplinariedad. 
Palabras clave
Agujero negro, objetividad, observación, física, Galison, redes
The Black Hole in M87
Over the past century we have witnessed certain paradigm changes  in how we observe and understand the Universe. Each has simulta- neously overturned and built on established scientific theory that went  before them, theories that also worked perfectly well for the purpose.  Some of these accurately describe phenomena and properties at  observable and/or tangible scales, while we also understand that they  do not provide a complete picture of nature. One of the fundamental  questions in physics is how to unify general relativity and quantum  physics. There is one partly understood cosmological phenomenon  which lies at the heart of this question, and whose study may be  able to provide insights into this reconciliation; and those objects  are black holes.
Earlier this year, in April 2019, we were enthralled by the first ever  image taken of a black hole. This incredible image was produced by a  team of 200 scientists from 59 institutes across 18 countries drawing  on data collected by eight telescopes located in Hawaii, the Atacama  desert and the South Pole, amongst others. This global network of  radio dishes is known as the Event Horizon Telescope (EHT), referring  directly to its mission to directly observe the immediate environment  of a black hole, and effectively creates an Earth-sized interferometer  which exploits the rotation of the planet. The black hole imaged by  the EHT is located at the centre of Messier 87, a massive galaxy in  the nearby Virgo galaxy cluster, 55 million light-years from Earth  and having a mass 6.5 billion times that of the Sun. However, in the  image we are not actually seeing the black hole, we are seeing its  shadow, surrounded by an asymmetric emission ring with a diameter  of 0.01 light-years. This distance is equivalent to 632 astronomical  units, or 58.8 billion miles, or more than 14 times the distance of the 
1. (https://eventhorizontelescope.org/press-release-april-10-2019-astronomers-capture-first-image-black-hole)
Sun to Pluto. The bright crescent shape visible in the image is due  to the black hole’s rotation. It is not an image of a black hole, it is an  image of the phenomena surrounding and produced by a black hole. If immersed in a bright region, like a disc of glowing gas, we expect a  black hole to create a dark region similar to a shadow — something  predicted by Einstein’s general relativity that we’ve never seen be- fore, explained chair of the EHT Science Council Heino Falcke. «This  shadow, caused by the gravitational bending and capture of light by  the event horizon, reveals a lot about the nature of these fascinating  objects and allowed us to measure the enormous mass of M87’s  black hole.»  1
Using the Event Horizon Telescope, scientists obtained an image  of the black hole at the centre of galaxy M87, outlined by emis- sion from hot gas swirling around it under the influence of strong  gravity near its event horizon. Credits: Event Horizon Telescope  collaboration et al.
At the same time that the EHT was imaging the object, several  NASA spacecraft were also observing the black hole using different  wavelengths of light. The Chandra X-ray Observatory, Nuclear Spec- troscopic Telescope Array (NuSTAR) and Swift Observatory space  telescope missions, all looked at the object with different varieties  of X-ray light. Meanwhile the Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope  was also watching for changes in gamma-ray light from M87 during  the EHT observations. If EHT observed changes in the structure of Page 3

the black hole’s environment, data from these missions and other  supporting telescopes could be used to work out what was going on.  The scale and complexity of this observation, and the processing of  the data into the image, is breathtaking.  
So the image produced by this mammoth observation throws up  some very interesting and intricately linked issues. Some of these  issues relate to how we see the data we get from scientific observa- tion, and how we deal with very real ‘filters’ and ‘lenses’ that might  colour our perceptions. Others relate to the complexity of experiments  at the edges of fundamental physics and the transformation of the  planet into a vast and interconnected sensory system. By focussing  on some of the interesting and challenging notions thrown up by the  incredible achievement of imaging the black hole in M87, maybe  we can shed some light on how these factors shape our culture and  our sense of reality.
Mechanical Objectivity
The philosopher of science, Peter Galison has discussed in great  depth how these forms of complex observation would be possible  via the achievements of large-scale scientific, and transdisciplinary  collaborations. He was also concerned with how languages could be  developed that would connect scientific subcultures and establish  ‘trading zones’ where ideas and perceptions and methodologies could  come together. 2
Through exploring the complex interactions between the three  principal subcultures of physics; experimentation, instrumentation,  and theory, and applying his own philosophy of interpretations he  has discussed how the image of the black hole in M87 was produ- ced and the efforts to eradicate unwanted human subjectivity in the  analysis and development of it. His particular interest in black holes,  incidentally, led him to be one of the founder members of the Black  Hole Initiative, an interdisciplinary program at Harvard University that  includes the fields of Astronomy, Physics and Philosophy, to focus on  the study of black holes. 3
The black hole offered a particularly obtuse challenge, namely  how to image something in the visual realm from which light does  not escape. This conundrum challenges not just the technical and  experimental prowess of the scientists and engineers involved, but  also the philosophical factors of how our desire to see something  can colour the way we see it. Members of the EHT board expressed 
2.  Galison, Peter. “Trading with the Enemy”. Trading Zones and Interactional Expertise: Creating New Kinds of Collaboration, edited by Michael E. Gorman,  MIT Press, 2010
3. https://bhi.fas.harvard.edu/
4. (https://eventhorizontelescope.org/press-release-april-10-2019-astronomers-capture-first-image-black-hole) 5.  Daston, Lorraine. “On Scientific Observation”. Isis, Vol. 99, No. 1,  2008
6.  Dason, Lorraine and Galison, Peter. “The Image of Objectivity”. Representations, No. 40, Special Issue: Seeing Science. University of California Press 1992
the difficulties of being sure of the image they had from their own  perspectives;
«Once we were sure we had imaged the shadow, we could compare  our observations to extensive computer models that include the  physics of warped space, superheated matter and strong magnetic  fields. Many of the features of the observed image match our theo- retical understanding surprisingly well,” remarks Paul T.P. Ho, EHT  Board member and Director of the East Asian Observatory. “This  makes us confident about the interpretation of our observations,  including our estimation of the black hole’s mass.»  4
As humans, the overwhelming majority of us need our information  to be presented to us in visual form. As still or moving images that  allow us to project ourselves into their representation. Unfortunately  however, most scientific data comes in the form of numbers, graphs  and spectra. Therefore, the ways of seeing and translation become  critical territories. As part of our evolution for survival our brains have  become trained to interpret patterns and recognise known things  from basic and incomplete inputs, and this instinct subconsciously  colours just about all of our visual language. It is difficult to bypass  seeing what we know and to just see. Lorraine Daston talks of a  question “framed in neo-Kantian terms: Was there or was there not  such a thing as scientific observation uncontaminated by theory?  This was a question posed against a background of fears about how  preconceived ideas, wishful thinking, and other subjective ’lenses’  might ’filter’ or ’distort’ objective empirical results”. 5
In order to avoid this risk of seeing what we want to see, of seeing  what we see as opposed to what we know, the idealised image  of a thing, Galison developed and updated the idea of ‘mechanical  objectivity’. In his view, trained judgment supplemented mechanical  objectivity, recognising that, in order for images or data to be of  any use, scientists needed to be able to see scientifically; that is, to  interpret images or data and identify and group them according to  particular professional training, rather than to simply depict them  mechanically. Objectivity now came to involve a combination of trained  judgment and mechanical objectivity. 6
Mechanical Objectivity is in many ways a reaction to the modes of  scientific observation and visualisation of the 18th and 19th century,  where it was common to represent an idealised form of the object  rather than its true character as seen at that moment, for that indivi- dual data set or observation. The purpose of these forms of imaging  were to standardise the observing subjects and observed objects of  the discipline by eliminating idiosyncrasies, not only those of individual  observers but also those of individual phenomena. While this might  work averaged out over huge data sets, it gives us no real clues as to Page 4

how individual variations and particular phenomena really are. It also  tempts us to cheat the data, a subjective and idealised approach over  a truly objective one. However, certain visionaries such as the French  physiologist E.J. Marey in the late 19th Century began to realise  that this approach would quickly prove inadequate and foresaw the  use of machines to aid us in our interpretations. While the phrase  ‘Let nature speak for itself’ became something of a motto of a new  brand of scientific objectivity, Marey and his contemporaries turned  to mechanically produced images to eliminate suspect mediation.  Employing polygraphs, photographs, and a host of other devices they  sought to free scientific observation from human interference. 
Fast-forwarding 150 years, in his lecture ‘The Philosophy of the  Shadow’, Galison discusses how mechanical objectivity was employed  in his work involved in the development of the image of the black hole  in M87. The petabytes of data accumulated through the observation  was first resolved into a fairly noisy ‘dirty’ image. The challenge was  then to remove the noise, improve the resolution and deliver the  final, more accurate version. The traditional method in astronomy is  to use a process succinctly called ‘Clean’ which involves iterations of  Fourier transforms, centring, blurring and trimming. This is a highly  effective method for point sources when performed by highly skilled  operators with previous knowledge of what they are looking for. It  works well for objects we reasonably understand and have seen  before; stars, galaxies, etc. However, it can also tend to build in the  idiosyncrasies of the operator. For the image of the black hole the  problem was deepened by there being absolutely no prior information  on which to build the analysis, and the scope for assumptions based  on best guesses became huge. So, how can you bring together enough  assumptions to bring something out of the dirty image without those  assumptions colouring what it is you want to find?
By sharing out the same data sets to different groups, and by  asking them to apply all the processing tools at their disposal, while  being prepared to reveal something they weren’t necessarily expec- ting, Galison proposed that the truth of the image would come out.  They believed that if differing resolutions were achieved, the points  at which they coincided would tell them what they could actually  believe. Eventually through iterations of isolated working groups,  application of different processing algorithms and comparisons of  results, an application of mechanical objectivity revealed the famous  image of the black hole that was transmitted around the world on  April 10th 2019. 7
This dedication and rigour to produce accurate and representatio- nal visual artefacts can be contrasted with the less precise processes  that underpin them. Science (and also philosophy) employ models,  idealizations, metaphors and thought experiments that are for all 
7.  Galison, Peter. Inaugural Yip lecture, Harvard CMSA, April 2019). 8.  Elgin, Catherine Z. “True Enough”. Philosophical Issues 14. 2004
9.  Hörl, Erich. “Introduction to General Ecology: The Ecologization of Thinking”. Bloomsbury Academic. 2017
intents and purposes separate from truth in order to achieve other  cognitive ends. While the scientific objective may be to achieve the  truth, argues Catherine Elgin, the relation between truth and epistemic  acceptability is both more tenuous and less direct than it is standardly  taken to be. Sometimes it is epistemically responsible to prescind from  truth to achieve global cognitive ends. 8  Therefore we can see that the 
methodology of extracting ‘true’ images from imprecise assumptions  can often be complicated and weighed down by human subjectivity.  It is striking that the production of the image of the M87 black hole  has embraced a scientific and philosophical approach in order to  render it as accurate as possible and to bypass such lenses and filters. 
The Earth as Complex Instrument
As we strive to understand the Universe, its scope, its beginning and  its probable end, we use an ever more complex suite of ever larger  instruments, hidden in ever more inaccessible and exotic places. We  have accelerator and detectors hidden underground, about 100 m  underground next to the Jura mountains at the Large Hadron Collider  at CERN, Geneva. Embedded 2.5 kilometres down in the Amundsen- Scott South Pole Station in Antarctica at the Geographic South Pole  is the IceCube Neutrino Observatory. In space we have the Hubble  telescope, radical missions such as the solar probe Parker, LIGO/ Virgo, as well as the aforementioned terrestrial observatories. In the  high desert of the Atacama in Chile we have the European Southern  Observatory where we find the Very Large Telescope, the Atacama  Large Millimeter Array and the High Accuracy Radial Velocity Planet  Searcher, amongst others. Similar research and observation sites  are spread across the planet in distant and surprising locations. This  massive infrastructure, hidden from everyday spheres and lives is  what is observing and measuring our existence and sense of reality.  They are the mysterious and secretive nodes of a planetary techno- consciousness and the infrastructure of knowledge capital. 
The German media philosopher Erich Hörl talks of the becoming- technology of the environment, and cites ‘Environmentality’ as the  dominant form of governmentality in the age of the Technocene. What  he refers to with this terminology is the total technological deployment  of sensors into the environment – or earth – and this process being so  pervasive as to contribute to the development of a new contemporary  rationality of power across the globe. 9  What we are talking about here 
is a subtle alteration of how we see and use the Earth. The ubiquity  of large scale scientific infrastructure across the globe creates a  shift in our human relationships with nature, establishing the planet  as oracle and test site at the same time. Concurrently the creation Page 5

and dispersion of new knowledge becomes the product of a global  network with its own social and political responsibilities and nuances.
Through this total technological deployment of sensors into the  environment we are attempting to unravel the mystery of who and  what we are, where we come from and where we are going. A pro- found expression of human curiosity. By simulating the physics as  close as possible to the Big Bang, by projecting into the future of the  Universe while simultaneously looking back in time, and by probing  into the nature of matter until matter itself begins to disappear, we  reveal and pick apart what reality really is. Through science of this  magnitude, across distances and times and scales, we distinguish  ourselves ontologically. Modifying and enhancing our environment in  order to understand how we got here, and maybe even if it actually  means anything. These are all experiments way beyond the human  scale. 
The experiments around the LHC at CERN are 100 metres below  the ground and occupy caverns of enormous size. The beam tubes  are the emptiest space in the solar system, at times 100,000 times  hotter than the Sun, or colder than outer space. It is the most powerful  computer ever built. The beam tubes at LIGO are 4 kilometres long.  When one instrument is not large enough, and therefore sensitive  enough, in isolation it is networked with others around the globe.  The planet Earth becomes the scale and the site of the experiment.  Studying the Universe through interferometry, through particle colli- sions, through gravitational waves, and deciphering the information  gleaned by these technologies requires new ways of seeing, and new  ways of studying the nature of being. 
«The IceCube Neutrino Observatory represents one of the largest,  strangest, and most complex collaborations in the history of scientific  research. The collaboration essentially spent 300 million dollars to  stare into ice. Nostradamus stared into Obsidian. Hamlet scryed a  cloud. Like so many ancient forms of crystallomancy, hydromancy,  and geomancy, the IceCube apparatus captures visions of another  world in a translucent body. Visions looking both forward and back:  tracing the outlines of dying stars millions of light-years away, or  looking beyond the cosmic microwave background to see the first  380,000 years of the Cosmos.»  10
The proliferation of particle accelerators, deep space probes,  neutrino traps, dark matter detectors and networked observatories  effectively extends our human sensory cortex across new domains  and dimensions. While our scientific advancement has led us to apply  the study of subatomic particles, the phenomena of fundamental  physics, to model exotic states or properties of materiality (of matter),  to reproduce at some scale the conditions of the Big Bang and to  depict black holes, our infrastructure has grown to opposite extremes.  It seems that the smaller, and more esoteric our targets become, the  larger and more powerful becomes the apparatus we use to study 
10. Thomson, Jol. “Ve Vm Vt. The Ideal Cosmic Messengers”. Technosphere Magazine. November 2016 11. Sacasas, LM. “The Technological Sublime, Alive and Well”. April 2012  
them. Thus our relationships with nature are ever more mediated  through technological apparatus of a scale and complexity that most  of us are unable to grasp. We cannot continue viewing fundamental  research stations as isolated nodes while contemporary cutting-edge  science demands networks, interactions and the transcending of dis- ciplines. The siting of this machinery in exotic and far-flung locations  adds to its sense of mystery, almost bestowing magical properties.  How do we get meaning out of these machines? In what format does  it arrive, and how to we read it?
Human Cultural Reactions
There has been a transition in the notion of the sublime; from a  phenomenon of our relationship with nature to one of our relationship  with technology. More succinctly in many ways we find ourselves in  the sublime of technologised nature. Before it was nature that awed  us, that stirred a primal fear due to its great unknowns wrapped up  in its great beauty. Now, as we begin to believe that we understand  nature, to be in control of it, our awe and fear, with a generous hint  of expectation and again a sense of beauty, has shifted to technology.  That other great power that nurtures and enables us whilst suggesting  that it has become much bigger and more powerful than we can  understand. Our creation has outgrown us and now dominates us. The  possibilities suggested by Artificial Intelligence, genetic engineering  and geophysical manipulations are beyond our common understan- ding and thus beyond our general control. Technology has become  unknowable and exerts power over us. That advanced technology  we feel in control of, such as the detectors found around the LHC,  produces abstract information that borders on the esoteric. The  tangible unknowable begets the intangible unknowable. Technology  manifests magnificence and we submit ourselves to it. It is awesome,  overwhelming and alluring. 
This uncertainty, fear and awe we feel when confronted by big  technology pulls us in and inexorably draws us towards it. As we  once did exclusively with nature, we actively seek out those expe- riences bigger and more powerful than us. Witness the thousands  of people that attended the Apollo and later Space Shuttle launches,  the droves that attend a large scale demolition, that are beguiled and  fascinated by the scale and scope of CERN. As historian David Nye  points out, by attending these quasi-religious events «the event is  less a matter of spectatorship than a pilgrimage to a shrine where  a technological miracle is confidently expected». The metaphor of  high technology as god is tired and overworked, but it is easy to  see how it came about.  11Page 6

These massive, intra-planetary scientific constellations are pro- bing the Universe across space and time with more power and high  resolution than we have ever known. The phenomena we are able  to predict, search for and observe are increasingly difficult to pin  down. Too small, too fleeting, to distant, too unknown. All too often  the data we are receiving does not match anything we have seen  before and requires a rigour of perception and interpretation beyond  what was previously required. This is not to say that previous grand  breakthroughs in observational science were easy; the discovery of  bacteria and the heliocentric nature of the Solar System, for example,  required great minds, great imaginations and refined instruments. But  the hunting for exoplanet atmospheres, for neutrinos, for the nature  of dark matter and for imaging black holes requires instrumentation  and imagination right at the extreme of human capacity. So much  so that the realisation is finally becoming accepted that without the  application of philosophy and culture to the problems they will be  very difficult to solve and even harder to make sense of. 
It is interesting to consider a certain resetting of objectivity over  the past 200 years, as not just the precision of measurement has  needed to be constantly refined, but also the way we interpret it. From  the ‘truth to nature’ approaches of the early 18th Century, through the  development of mechanical objectivity, and finally to what we refer to  as trained judgement. While such methodologies are being employed  widely across all kinds of data sets from all kinds of experiments, the  image of the black hole in M87 released to the world on 10th April  2019 was the moment when we were all thrilled, enlightened, and  certainly awed by the results of contemporary scientific objectivity. 
References
https://eventhorizontelescope.org/press-release-april-10-2019-as- tronomers-capture-first-image-black-hole
Galison, Peter. «Trading with the Enemy». Trading Zones and Interac- tional Expertise: Creating New Kinds of Collaboration, edited by  Michael E. Gorman, MIT Press, 2010
https://bhi.fas.harvard.edu/
(https://eventhorizontelescope.org/press-release-april-10-2019-as- tronomers-capture-first-image-black-hole)
Daston, Lorraine. «On Scientific Observation». Isis, Vol. 99, No. 1,  2008 Dason, Lorraine and Galison, Peter. «The Image of Objectivity». Re- presentations, No. 40, Special Issue: Seeing Science. University  of California Press 1992
Galison, Peter. Inaugral Yip lecture, Harvard CMSA, April 2019). Elgin, Catherine Z. «True Enough». Philosophical Issues 14. 2004 Hörl, Erich. «Introduction to General Ecology: The Ecologization of 
Thinking». Bloomsbury Academic. 2017
Thomson, Jol. «Ve Vm Vt. The Ideal Cosmic Messengers». Technos- phere Magazine. November 2016
Sacasas, LM. «The Technological Sublime, Alive and Well». April 2012Page 7

CV
Andy Gracie  Hostprods
andy@hostprods.net
Andy Gracie works across various disciplines including installation,  robotics, sound, video and biological practice. This work is situated  at a point of separation between the arts and the sciences, creating  situations of exchange which allow new understandings and knowledge  systems to develop. Much of his work involves reactions to and enga- gements with the science of astrobiology and other forms of space re- search. He looks at space as a non-human and unfeeling environment,  balancing wonder with awe and fear. His practice employs scientific  theory and practice to question our relationships with exploration and  experiment whilst simultaneously bringing into focus the very relation- ship between art and science, and how new knowledge is culturally  assimilated. Much of the work also features an ongoing engagement  with semiotics, simulation theory and apocalyptic scenarios. His work  has been exhibited widely and internationally in both solo and group  shows and has included several special commissions for new works.  He presents regularly at conferences and seminars across the globe  and has published a number of articles and papers. His work has  received honourable mentions from VIDA and Ars Electronica in 2007  and Ars Electronica in 2015.Page 8

CV
Mónica Bello CERN
monica.bello@cern.ch
Mónica Bello (born 1973) is a Spanish curator and art historian. Over  the last 12 years she has focused on the multidisciplinary perspectives  and the narratives of today’s techno-scientific culture. In her curatorial  research and projects she discusses the way artists instigate new  conversations around emergent phenomena in our society and culture,  such as the role of science and new knowledge in the perception of  reality. She is currently the Head of Arts at CERN at the European  Organization for Nuclear Research in Geneva, where she curates the  research-led artistic residencies and the new art commissions that re- flect on the conversations and interactions between artists and particle  physicists. Prior to her arrival to Geneva she held the position of Artistic  Director of VIDA (2010-2015) at Fundación Telefónica, Madrid (Spain),  a pioneering award that fostered cross cultural expressions around  the notion of life. She initiated and ran (2007-2010) the Department of  Education at Laboral Centro de Arte, Gijón (Spain). She has curated ex- hibitions and events internationally with contemporary artists, creators  and thinkers of different disciplines. As an internationally recognised  figure within art and science networks, Bello is a regular speaker at  conferences and participates in selection committees, advisory boards  and mentorship programs.